DMB: Clarify and extend applications (#159)
ubuntu/ubuntu-project-docs: docs/staging/dmb/dmb-aspects-of-a-good-application.md

## Endorsements and application materials

Applicants must follow the {ref}`DMB application process <dmb-application>` to collect their materials on an application page.
The application must contain evidence of appropriate work for the level of upload rights, if you can also provide evidence of the learning topic along the way even better.
Topics must include endorsements from current Ubuntu members, developers, and uploaders.
When applying for a specific level, having endorsements from current members with the same or wider rights is required.

It is recommended to have endorsements of members from outside your team/Organization, they provide implicit evidence of you being well connected in the community vs working in silo.

> Depending on the upload rights being pursued, and breadth of delegated power, this is more strict and those really should have endorsements from outside their current team and if possible company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the upload rights being pursued, and breadth of delegated power, this is more strict and those really should have endorsements from outside their current team and, if possible, their company.
```

> To allow that to accrue while working towards upload rights, please consider to sometimes ask non-team or non-company members to review and sponsor your work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow that to accrue while working towards upload rights, consider sometimes asking non-team or non-company members to review and sponsor your work.
```

* Frederick is a member of Canonical Support Engineering. Their work has been focused on SRUs of fixes to stable releases. They attained SRU-dev and are working toward Core Dev. In their first application, they only included endorsements from current Support Engineering members. This application will raise concerns from the DMB over Frederick’s communication and culture fit.

* Günther is working in the project for quite some time. They have 2 contributions to 3 packages each - and the people sponsoring those have endorsed Günther. But those have been long ago and there are two other sponsors that have done the majority of the work of Günther in recent years. Without an explanation that will make people question if that recent work was not good quality.

> * John wants to apply for the rather new debcrafter package set, but it only has one member so far. This is not a dead-lock due to requiring endorsements from the same level - endorsements by people sponsoring for him into other similar package sets or core developers would also back his case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* John wants to apply for the rather new debcrafter package set, but it only has one member so far. The requirement to have endorsements from the same level is not a blocker here -- endorsements by people sponsoring for him in other/similar package sets, or core developers, could also back his case.
```

### Partial endoresement

In the same context it is important to understand that people can partially endorse you.

> To be clear, please do not provide us with a puzzle of 27 fragmented partial endoresements - but a few can be helpful to fill some gaps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be clear, please do not provide us with a puzzle of 27 fragmented partial endorsements -- but a few can be helpful to fill some gaps.
```

If you have contacts that worked with you in depth, but only on particular aspects you should still consider asking them for endorsement.

Yet again it is important to avoid misunderstandings.
They should clearly state if a) they have doubts in the non-mentioned areas or b) just do not know all aspects, but are happy to endorse you for those they worked with you.

Example:

> * Paulina applies, has two full endoresments but also has worked with many more project members. 3 of them provide partial endorsements, one speaking about the kind interaction on bugs and the great chat behavior - another about great things they have sponsored - and another about a very complex transition you helped them. All of them mention that they do not cover the other aspects of a full endorsement because they just didn't have this kind of exposure to you yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Paulina applies, has two full endorsements but also has worked with many more project members. Three of them provide partial endorsements: one speaking about the kind interaction on bugs and the great chat behavior; another about great things they have sponsored; and another about a very complex transition they helped with. All of them mention that they do not cover the other aspects of a full endorsement because they just didn't have this kind of exposure to Paulina yet.
```

> * Ewan applies, has no full endorsement at all but three partial ones. The partial ones mention a somewhat positive aspect in regard to their work with you, but leave an ominous void about all else and thereby too much room for (negative) speculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ewan applies, has no full endorsement at all but three partial ones. The partial ones mention a somewhat positive aspect in regard to their work with him, but leave an ominous void about all else -- and thereby too much room for (negative) speculation.
```

## Knowledge of Ubuntu Development

There are many things to know about, from a thorough understanding of (and experience in) Debian packaging, to Ubuntu-specific aspects such as Ubuntu package merges, SRUs, the release cycle, milestones and exceptions, autopkgtest and proposed migration, handling transitions, the operation of the seeds and MIRs.

> We expect demonstrated understanding and evidence of such. An extended list is outlined at {ref}`DMB Application Knowledge Requirements <dmb-application-knowledge-requirements>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect demonstrated understanding and evidence of such. An extended list is outlined at {ref}`DMB Application Knowledge Requirements <dmb-application-knowledge-requirements>`.
```

(dmb-aspects-of-a-good-application)=
# Aspects of a good DMB application

```{note}
[Source page](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/RobieBasak/DMB/Expectations)

```

Since every applicant is unique, what makes a "good" DMB application can be flexible. No two applications are ever exactly the same, and everyone has a different position to some extent.

If you need different considerations for some reason, make sure to explain this in your application and we are happy to consider it.

## Track record

Applicants must have an existing track record of sponsored uploads to the packages they are requesting direct upload access to.
The DMB normally approves applications either to reduce contributor friction in needing sponsorship or to save the work of sponsors.

Example:

> * Alice is working diligently on Openstack packages, getting many sponsored uploads every cycle. After a second cycle, in which only minimal / minor changes needed to happen, Alice feels confident in applying for cloud packageset upload rights.

Reviewer 2: "in which only minimal / minor *review* changes needed to happen" is I think what you mean, as opposed to packaging changes in general?

Author: yes, "review triggered" is even more clear.
Thanks - added

It is recommended to have endorsements of members from outside your team/Organization. They provide implicit evidence of you being well connected in the community, rather than working in a silo.
Depending on the upload rights being pursued, and breadth of delegated power, this is more strict and those really should have endorsements from outside their current team and, if possible, their company.
To allow that to accrue while working towards upload rights, consider sometimes asking non-team or non-company members to review and sponsor your work.
Also partial endorsements (see below) can help to more quickly get at least some external endorsement.

Including endorsements from sponsors is the best way to show evidence.
If an application lacks endorsements from major package sponsors, it will negatively impact an application if it causes the suspicion that those that have seen a lot of your work would not support your application.
That does not mean, if you have many sponsors, that all of them have to endorse you, but help us to understand why some have been left out.

Example:

> * Evelyn is a member of the Canonical Foundations Toolchain Squad. They have worked extensively on Zig, not just on the toolchain but on many leaf packages. Over time, Evelyn has built up a portfolio of helping across Ubuntu, not just with Zig but in other areas. First, they applied for a speciality packageset `zig-packages`, and got endorsements from current packageset uploaders and a Ubuntu core developer, all within Canonical Foundations (but including a Ubuntu core developer outside their immediate team). When applying for Ubuntu core developer, they went through their uploads and asked sponsors from Debcrafters and Server to provide endorsements as well. This shows a work across immediate Canonical Teams.

Reviewer 2: Grammar: "shows a work"

Author: Thanks for raising this - this was also a bit unclear still.
Changed it to what it really is:
"This demonstrates work and interaction within, but also outside their immediate team"

(dmb-aspects-of-a-good-application)=

> # DMB Aspects of a good application

Author: This was meant to keep a common style of DMB being the prefix.
WDYT Sally, what wins - common style or sentence structure?

> # DMB Aspects of a good application

Reviewer: Sentence structure imo - the page titles can be played with, on all the DMB pages. The important thing is that they all contain dmb in the filename so we can set up ACLs.

> # DMB Aspects of a good application

Author: ok

```{note}
[Source page](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/RobieBasak/DMB/Expectations)

Note, I have not touched the wording of this document -- only added formatting
to provide visual markers
```

All of this is flexible
No application is exactly the same; everyone’s position is different to some extent
Where a situation calls for different consideration for some reason, I am happy to consider it
If this applies to you, please make sure to explain in your application how you think you need different consideration.

## Track Record

Applicants must have an existing track record of sponsored uploads to packages to which direct upload access is requested
The DMB normally approves applications either to reduce contributor friction in needing sponsorship or to save the work of sponsors.

Example:

> * Alice is working diligently on Openstack packages, getting many sponsored uploads every cycle. After a second cycle, in which only minimal / minor changes needed to happen, Alice feels confident in applying for cloud packageset upload rights.

Author: yes that is known further outside as far as I can tell

This communication should be made in the appropriate public channels, such as Matrix, Discourse, or mailing lists
If you have not been active in public communication, it will affect your application negatively.

Examples:

* Daryl, in learning from their past mistake, is working on improving their communication. Before their next upload, they produce an informative Discourse entry with changelog information and possible issues that could happen. Along with the Discourse post, they post a topic in the mailing list, alerting everyone that they are planning the change on a given specific date. They've prepared a PPA already and are considering a series of test builds to ensure issues are caught. Several Ubuntu members voice concerns, and ask for tests of their packages in main. Daryl works with everyone to ensure a smooth transition, helping to unblock members during the testing and upload of $MAJOR\_LIBRARY.

## Endorsements and Application Materials

Applicants must follow the details of the {ref}`DMB application process <dmb-application>` to collect their materials on a page.

> The application must contain evidence of appropriate work for the level of upload rights, if you can also provide evidence of the learning topic along the way even better.

Author: The evidence that proves that the stuff mentioned in the table is done/known.

Topics must include endorsements from current Ubuntu members, developers, and uploaders.
When applying for a specific level, having endorsements from current members with the same rights is required.
For Canonical employees, it is recommended to have endorsements of members outside of Canonical.

> Depending on the upload rights being pursued, and breadth of delegated power, an applicant should have endorsements from outside their current Canonical organization.

Author: True, I'll add that to my changes to add

We expect demonstrated understanding and evidence of such, an extended list of those is outlined at {ref}`DMB Application Knowledge Requirements <dmb-application-knowledge-requirements>`

## Use the different stages to your advantage

We would expect a Core Dev applicant to be an already experienced Ubuntu uploader through one of the other uploading teams such as a packageset or MOTU
To directly go to Core Dev we’d expect an exceptionally strong application
It is hard to go from zero to hero, but it does not have to be
Socially we prefer to approve people and you prefer to be approved \- therefore we suggest not to apply for the strictest permissions right away.

Please consider applying in steps, start with something easier to achieve matching your experience and contributions
Then use these permissions to further collaborate and extend your track record to apply for the next stages sometime later.

> # Canonical employees

Author: OK, accepted then
